---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/_Documents/文献集/","noteIcon":"","created":"2025-07-31T13:43:21.487+08:00","updated":"2025-08-03T21:47:54.088+08:00"}
---


# 约定格式说明  
本文件后续的文献整理满足以下格式, 以方便查阅/回忆:

|      | 含义                                                                                                                             |
| ---- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| 一级标题 | 论文研究方向                                                                                                                         |
| 二级标题 | 论文索引和论文标题                                                                                                                      |
| 论文   | 论文的基本信息，采用 [[_Documents/APA引用格式\|APA引用格式]].<br>后缀：<br>- Not read yet. 未读<br>- have read.已读<br>- read partially. 部分已读<br>- 参阅日期 |
| 简述   | 论文的主要内容和研究结果                                                                                                                   |
| 链接   | 论文的网址链接或本地库链接                                                                                                                  |
| 补充   | 其他补充说明, 包括生词本等等                                                                                                                |

# 一. Chorus Wave
## 1. Analytical chorus wave model derived from Van Allen Probe  observations. (have read)

##### 论文
Wang, D., Shprits, Y. Y., Zhelavskaya, I. S., Agapitov, O. V., Drozdov, A. Y., & Aseev, N. A. (2019). Analytical chorus wave model derived from Van Allen Probe  observations. *Journal of Geophysical Research: Space Physics, 124*, 1063–1084. https://doi.org/10.1029/2018JA026183
##### 简述
开发了一个 upper-band chorus (UBC; 0.5 fce < f < fce ) and lower-band chorus (LBC; 0.05 fce < f < 0.5 fce ) waves 的均方根振幅 $B_w^2$ 和频率的多项式回归 model, 使用较低阶数的多项式实现了较高的平均相关系数 $R^2(>0.9)$ 的 model 构建.   

均方根振幅 model 是以下参数的函数: Kp 指数($\leq 6$, 单独的 scale 函数); 磁纬度 $\lambda(<20^\circ)$; 磁当地时间 MLT(分为几个扇区); 在等离子层顶之外的L shell($\in [3.5/4,6]$). 拟合形式是:  
$$
\sqrt{\langle B^2_w (MLT, L, |λ| , Kp)\rangle} = f (MLT, L, |λ|)g(Kp).
$$
$$
\begin{aligned}
f (MLT, L, |λ|) &= f (A, B, L, |λ|) \\
&=a_0 + a_1 A + a_2B + a_3 L + a_4 |\lambda| + a_5 AB + a_6 AL + a_7A |\lambda| + a_8BL \\
&\quad + a_9 B |\lambda| + a_10 L^2 + a_{11}L |\lambda| + a_{12} |\lambda|^2. \\
&here,~A=\cos\left( MLT\times \frac{\pi}{12} \right),~B=\sin\left( MLT\times \frac{\pi}{12} \right)
\end{aligned}
$$
$$
g(Kp)=\frac{{g_0(Kp)}}{\frac{1}{6} \int_0^6 {g_0(Kp)}\mathrm{d}Kp},\quad 
g_0 (Kp) = b_1Kp + b_2Kp^2 + b_3 Kp^3 + b_4 Kp^4 .
$$
频率 model 是 MLT 和 $\lambda$ 的函数, 但是仅仅区分了日侧($MLTs\in [6,18)$)和夜侧(其他 MLTs), 以及低纬度($|\lambda|<10^\circ$)和中纬度($|\lambda|\in[10^\circ, 20^\circ)$). 拟合形式是:   
$$
\begin{aligned}
B^2_w ( f ) &= c_0 + c_1f + c_2 f
{ #2}
 + c_3 f
{ #3}
 + c_4 f
{ #4}
 + c_5 f
{ #5}
 + c_6 f
{ #6}
 + c_7f^7.
\\
&here,~ f ~is~ the~ frequency~ normalized~ by~ the~ equatorial ~gyrofrequency. 
\end{aligned}
$$
给出的连续函数形式可以很容易地合并到 quasi-linear diffusion models 和 particle tracing codes 当中. 文章中罗列的总结是:
1. In general, upper-band chorus waves have lower amplitudes than lower-band chorus waves.
2. MLT dependences are different for chorus waves at midlatitude and low latitude. At low latitudes or near
the equator, chorus waves are strong on the nightside and weak on the dayside; however, at midlatitudes,
dayside chorus waves are stronger than nightside chorus waves.
3. L-shell dependences are different for upper-band chorus waves and lower-band chorus waves at low lat-
itudes, which may be explained by different energy sources for different bands and an upflow of warm
electrons from the ionosphere (Denton et al., 2017).
4. For the latitudinal dependence, the intensity of upper-band chorus waves basically decreases with latitude.
Intensity of lower-band chorus decreases with latitude on the nightside but increases with latitude on the
dayside.
5. The Kp dependence is separated from the dependences on geomagnetic latitude, L, and MLT as a Kp scal-
ing law. In general, the intensity of chorus waves increases with Kp. However, in those regions with L > 5,
when Kp > 4, intensities of upper-band chorus waves on all MLT sectors and lower-band chorus waves
on the afternoon sector decrease with Kp. For lower-band chorus waves, this trend may be attributed to
the enhanced convection of hot electrons during strong storms, which increase their loss to the magne-
topause. For upper-band chorus waves, this may be related to the enhanced upflow of warm electrons
in high L-shell, which decrease the temperature anisotropy of warm electrons (Denton et al., 2017). This
trend at high Kp may also be attributed to the lack of statistics. The number of measurements at high Kp
is smaller than those at low Kp.
6. Peak frequency of lower-band chorus waves decreases with geomagnetic latitude.
7. At low latitudes, the main frequency domain of lower-band chorus waves on the nightside is narrower
than that on the dayside.
8. Upper-band chorus waves are mainly confined at low latitudes. The peak frequency of upper band cho-
rus waves are basically the same on the dayside and nightside. However, the main frequency domain of
upper-band chorus waves on the nightside is narrower than that on the dayside.

##### 链接
[[_Documents/docs/Wang et al. - 2019 - Analytical chorus wave model derived from Van Allen Probe  observations.pdf|Wang et al. - 2019 - Analytical Chorus Wave Model Derived from Van Alle]]
##### 补充
文章阅读中遇到的生词和略缩词在: [[_Documents/words/qld words- Analytical chorus wave model derived from Van Allen Probe  observations\|qld words- Analytical chorus wave model derived from Van Allen Probe  observations]]

## 2. Event-specific chorus wave and electron seed population models in DREAM 3D using the Van Allen Probes  
##### 论文
Tu, W., G. S. Cunningham, Y. Chen, S. K. Morley, G. D. Reeves, J. B. Blake, D. N. Baker, and H. Spence (2014), Event-specific chorus wave and electron seed population models in DREAM 3 D using the Van Allen Probes, *Geophys. Res. Lett., 41*, 1359–1366, doi:10.1002/2013GL058819.
##### 简述  
基于简化版的 Fokker-Planck 方程(忽略了部分的交叉项 $D_{\alpha L}$ 和 $D_{pL}$):
$$   
\begin{aligned} 
\frac{\partial f}{\partial t} 
&= L^2 \frac{\partial}{\partial L} \left( \frac{D_{LL}}{L^2} \frac{\partial f}{\partial L} \right) + \frac{1}{p^2} \frac{\partial}{\partial p} \left( p^2 D_{pp} \frac{\partial f}{\partial p} \right) + \frac{1}{G} \frac{\partial}{\partial \alpha} \left( G D_{\alpha\alpha} \frac{\partial f}{\partial \alpha} \right)
\\
&\quad\quad- \frac{f}{\tau} + \frac{1}{p^2} \frac{\partial}{\partial p} \left( p^2 D_{p\alpha} \frac{\partial f}{\partial \alpha} \right) + \frac{1}{G} \frac{\partial}{\partial \alpha} \left( G D_{\alpha p} \frac{\partial f}{\partial p} \right)   
 \end{aligned}
$$
在三维(能量 E, 投掷角 $\alpha$, L shell)构建了 `DREAM 3D` 扩散模型, 上式的 p 是动量.  



##### 链接
[[_Documents/docs/Tu et al. - 2014 - Event‐specific chorus wave and electron seed popul.pdf|Tu et al. - 2014 - Event‐specific chorus wave and electron seed popul]]
##### 补充
文章阅读中遇到的生词以及**一些关键概念**在: [[_Documents/words/qld words- Event-specific chorus wave and electron seed population models in DREAM3D using the Van Allen Probes\|qld words- Event-specific chorus wave and electron seed population models in DREAM3D using the Van Allen Probes]]







